Dedication
Gravity's Rainbow carries the dedication "For Richard Fariña". Pynchon had been 
a good friend of Fariña, a folk singer and novelist, since they had attended 
Cornell University together. Fariña had died in a motorcycle accident in 1966.

The title
Gravity's Rainbow is composed of four parts, each segmented into a number of 
episodes. In the original editions of the book, the episodes were separated by a 
row of seven small squares. Many readers, reviewers, and scholars, such as 
Richard Poirier, have suggested that the squares resemble the film perforations 
known as "sprocket holes" that engage with the teeth in a film camera or 
projector to advance the strip of film.[7] The squares, however, were inserted 
by Edwin Kennebeck, an editor at the book's original publisher, Viking Press.[8] 
Kennebeck denied that the layout was intentional, and later editions of the 
novel separate the segments with only one square.

Part 1: Beyond the Zero (21 episodes)
The name "Beyond the Zero" refers to lack of total extinction of a conditioned 
stimulus. The events of this part occur primarily during the Christmas Advent 
season of 1944 from December 18–26, coinciding in part with the Battle of the 
Bulge. The epigraph is a quotation from a pamphlet written by the rocket 
scientist Wernher von Braun and first published in 1962: "Nature does not know 
extinction; all it knows is transformation. Everything science has taught me, 
and continues to teach me, strengthens my belief in the continuity of our 
spiritual existence after death."[9] The epigraph reflects themes of anticipated 
redemption and blurring of the sacred and secular, both of which pervade Part 
1.[10] The epigraph is also potentially ironic, given von Braun's central role 
in the development of Nazi Germany's V-2 rocket.

Part 2: Une Perm au Casino Hermann Goering (8 episodes)
"Une Perm au Casino Hermann Goering" is French for "A Furlough at the Hermann 
Göring Casino". The events of this section span the five months from Christmas 
1944 through to Whitsunday the following year, May 20, 1945. The 
misrepresentation or reinterpretation of identity is reflected in Slothrop's 
journey as well as the epigraph, attributed to Merian C. Cooper, speaking to Fay 
Wray prior to her starring role in King Kong, as recounted by Wray in the 
September 21, 1969, issue of The New York Times: "You will have the tallest, 
darkest leading man in Hollywood."[11]

Part 3: In the Zone (32 episodes)
Part 3 is set during the summer of 1945 with analepses (literary flashbacks) to 
the time period of Part 2 with most events taking place between May 18 and 
August 6; the day of the atomic bomb attack on Hiroshima and also the Feast of 
the Transfiguration. The epigraph is taken from The Wizard of Oz, spoken by 
Dorothy as she arrives in Oz and shows her disorientation with the new 
environment: "Toto, I have a feeling we're not in Kansas any more...".

Part 4: The Counterforce (12 episodes)
Part 4 begins shortly after August 6, 1945, and covers the period up to 
September 14 of that same year; the day of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, 
with extended analepses to Easter/April Fool's weekend of 1945 and culminating 
in a prolepsis to 1970. The simple epigraphical quotation, "What?" is attributed 
to Richard M. Nixon, and was added after the galleys of the novel had been 
printed to insinuate the President's involvement in the unfolding Watergate 
scandal.[12] The original quotation for this section (in the advance reading 
copies of the book) was an excerpt from the lyrics to the Joni Mitchell song 
"Cactus Tree" ("She has brought them to her senses/They have laughed inside her 
laughter/Now she rallies her defenses/For she fears that one will ask her/For 
eternity/And she’s so busy being free"), so the change in quotation jumped a 
large cultural divide.
